# Lecture 8 - Notes  

### May 20, 2015  

## Section 2.1 Continued

#### Example

Let $A = \{ 1 ,2 , \emptyset \}$ and $B = \{ 1,3,A \}$. Which of the following are true?

1. $\emptyset \in A$
2. $\{ 1 \} \in A$
3. $2 \in B$
4. $A \in B$
5. $\{A\} \in B$
6. $A \subseteq B$

##### Solution

Only 1 and 4 are true. 2, 3, 5 and 6 are false.

### Proper Subsets

_definition_: $A$ is a __proper subset__ of $B$ if $A \subseteq B$ and $A \neq B$. It is written $A \subset B$.

### Properties of Sets

* Any set $S$ has $S \subseteq S$.
* Any set $S$ has $\emptyset \subseteq S$.
* An $n$ element set has $2^n$ subsets.

#### Example

How many subsets does $\{ a,b \}$ have?

##### Solution

Four,

* $\{ a \}$
* $\{ b \}$
* $\{ a, b \}$
* $\emptyset$

### The Transitive Property of Subsets

If $A$, $B$ and $C$ are sets such that,

$$
    A \subseteq B \text{ and } B \subseteq C
$$

then,

$$
    A \subseteq C
$$

#### Proof

(RTP: Must show every element  in $A$ is also in $C$)

Suppose that $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq C$. Let $x \in A$. So then since $A \subseteq B$, $x \in B$. And so, since $B \subseteq C$, $x \in C$.

$$
    \therefore A \subseteq C
$$

#### Proposition

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. $A = B$ if and only if $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$.

Must show:

* $A = B \Rightarrow A \subseteq B \text{ and } B \subseteq A$
* $A \subseteq B \text{ and } B \subseteq A \Rightarrow A = B$

($\Rightarrow$) Suppose $A = B$. Let $x \in A$, and so $x \in B$ since $A = B$.

$$
    \therefore A \subseteq B
$$

Let $y \in B$, and so $y \in A$, since $A = B$

$$
    \therefore B \subseteq A
$$ 

($\Leftarrow$) Suppose $A \subseteq B$ and $B \subseteq A$. Suppose then to the contrary $A \neq B$.

WLOG, $\exists x \in A \text{ such that } x \not\in B$.

Which is a contradiction since $A \subseteq B$.

$$
    \therefore A = B
$$

### Power Sets

_defnition_: The __power set__ of a set $A$ (denoted $\mathcal{P}(A)$) is the set whose elements are the subsets of $A$.

#### Example

Let $A = \{ a, b, \}$. What is the power set of $A$?

Subsets of $A$ are:

* $\{ a \}$
* $\{ b \}$
* $\{ a, b \}$
* $\emptyset$

##### Solution

$$
    \mathcal{P}(A) = \{\{ a \}, \{ b \}, \{ a, b \}, \emptyset \}
$$

### Properties of Power Sets

Let $\mathcal{P}(A)$ be a power set of $A$.

* Every element of $\mathcal{P}(A)$ is a set.
* If $A$ has $n$ elements, $\mathcal{P}(A)$ has $2^n$ elements.
* $\emptyset \in \mathcal{P}(A)$
* $A \in \mathcal{P}(A)$
* $X \in \mathcal{P}(A) \iff X \subseteq A$

#### Proposition

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets.

$$
    A \subseteq B \iff \mathcal{P}(A) \subseteq \mathcal{P}(B)
$$

($\Rightarrow$) Suppose $A \subseteq B$. Let $X \in \mathcal{P}(A)$. Then $X \subseteq A \subseteq B$.

$$
    \therefore X \subseteq B \text{ and } X \in \mathcal{P}(B)
$$
$$
    \therefore \mathcal{P}(A) \subseteq \mathcal{P}(B)
$$

($\Leftarrow$) Suppose $\mathcal{P}(A) \subseteq \mathcal{P}(B)$. Recall $A \subseteq \mathcal{P}(A) \subseteq \mathcal{P}(B)$.

$$
    \therefore A \in \mathcal{P}(B)
$$
$$
    \therefore A \subseteq B
$$

## Section 2.2 - Set Operations

### Union

_definition_: Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. The __union__ of $A$ and $B$ (denoted $A \cup B$) is the set,

$$
    A \cup B = \{ x : x \in A \vee x \in B \}
$$

### Intersection

_defninition_: The __intersection__ of $A$ and $B$ (denoted $A \cap B$) is the set,

$$
    A \cap B = \{ x : x \in A \wedge x \in B \}
$$

#### Example

Let $W = \{ a,b,c,d,e \}$ and $V = \{ a,b,c,x,y,z \}$.

##### Solution

$$
    W \cup V = \{ a,b,c,d,e,x,y,z \}
$$
$$
    W \cap V = \{ a,b,c \}
$$
