# Lecture 18 - Notes  

### June 16, 2015  

## Section 3.3 Continued

#### Recall

A set is __countable__ if it is not countable.

#### Fact

The open interval $(0,1)$ is uncountable.

##### Proof

> _Proof Idea_: Let's use a proof by contradiction by trying to list the elements between zero and one. Then we'll show that no matter how we list the elements we always miss something.

Suppose to the contrary $(0,1)$ is countable, and we can list its elements,

$$
    [0.d_{10}d_{11}d_{12}d_{13}...],[0.d_{20}d_{21}d_{22}d_{23}...],[0.d_{30}d_{31}d_{12}d_{33}...],...
$$

where any $d_{ij} \in \{0,1,2,...,8,9 \}$ and $d_{ij}$ is the $j$^th digit of the $i$^th number.

Lets construct a new element $x$ on the interval $(0,1)$ and show that $x$ is not in the list. Since $x \in (0,1)$,

$$
    x = 0.x_{1}x_{2}x_{3}x_{4}x_{5}...
$$

where $x_i = \{ 0,1,2,...,9 \}$. Now let,

$$
    x_i = \left\{
      \begin{array}{lr}
        5 &\text{ if } d_{ii} \neq 5 \newline
        6 &\text{ if } d_{ii} = 5 \newline
      \end{array}
    \right.
$$

New we'll compare $x$ to our list,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    x = 0.x_{1}x_{2}x_{3}x_{4}... &\neq 0.d_{10}d_{11}d_{12}d_{13}... \newline
    &\neq 0.d_{20}d_{21}d_{22}d_{23}... \newline
    &\neq 0.d_{30}d_{11}d_{32}d_{33}... \newline
    &~~\vdots\newline
\end{aligned}
$$

Since $x$ is not in our list, the list does not count all elements and is therefore not countable.

###### Note

This technique is called __Cantor Diagonalization__.

#### Fact

A set $A$ is uncountable if it has an uncountable subset. So the real numbers $\mathbb R$ are uncountable since $(0,1) \subset \mathbb R$.

#### Example

Is $[0,1]$ countable?

##### Solution

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \left[0,1\right] &= (0,1) \cup \{ 0\} \cup \{1\} \newline
    (0,1) &\subseteq [0,1] \newline
\end{aligned}
$$

So $[0,1]$ is uncountable.

#### Fact

The irrational numbers $\mathbb I$ are uncountable.

##### Proof

Consider

$$ %Aligned
\begin{aligned}
    \mathbb R = \mathbb Q \cup mathbb I.
\end{aligned}
$$

Suppose to the contrary that $\mathbb I$ is countable. Since $\mathbb Q$ is countable this would make $\mathbb R$ countable. $\mathbb R$ is not countable therefore $\mathbb I$ must be uncountable.  

### Cantor's Continuum Hypothesis

There is no set $A$ such that,

$$ %Aligned
\begin{aligned}
    \aleph_0 \lt |A| \lt |\mathbb R|
\end{aligned}
$$

where $\aleph_0 = |\mathbb N|$.

* In 1940 Godel showed that we cannot prove the continuum hypothesis to be __false__.
* In 1963 Cohen showed that we cannot prove the continuum hypothesis to be __true__.

