# Lecture 17 - Notes  

### June 12, 2015  

## Section 3.3 Continued

#### Example

Let $2 \mathbb Z = \{ ...,-4,-2,0,2,4,... \}$, show $|\mathbb Z| = |2 \mathbb Z|$.

##### Solution

Define $f: \mathbb Z \mapsto \mathbb 2Z$, where,

$$
    f(x) = 2x
$$

which is a bijection (easy to prove).

### Countability

_definition_: A set $A$ is __countably infinite__ if,

$$ %Aligned
\begin{aligned}
    |A| = |\mathbb N|
\end{aligned}
$$

So if I can line up a value in a with a value in the countable numbers (natural numbers) it's countably infinite.

* $A$ is __countable__ if it is countably infinite or finite.
* If $A$ is not countable it is __uncountable__.

##### Note

Sometimes $|\mathbb N$ is denoted $\aleph_0$ ("Aleph naught").

#### Proposition

A set $A$ is countable if and only if $\exists$ a bijection $f: A \mapsto \mathbb N$ (i.e. you can list the elements of $A$).

#### Proposition

$\mathbb Z$ is countable. We can show a correspondence,

$$ %Aligned
\begin{aligned}
    \mathbb Z&: 0,-1,1,-2,2,-3,3,-4,4,... \newline
    \mathbb N&: 0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,... \newline
\end{aligned}
$$

This is a sufficient correspondence. However we can show a more mathy correspondence,

$$ %Aligned
\begin{aligned}
    f(x) = (-1)^n \lceil \frac{n}{2} \rceil
\end{aligned}
$$

#### Fact

A subset of a countable set is also countable.

#### Proposition

A set $A$ is countable if there exists a bijection $f: A \mapsto B$ where $B$ is any countable set.

#### Fact

$\mathbb N \times \mathbb N$ is countable! Lets make a table!

| $~$  | $0$ | $1$ | $2$ | $...$ |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| $0$ | $(0,0)$ | $(0,1)$ | $(0,2)$ | $...$ |
| $1$ | $(1,0)$ | $(1,1)$ | $(1,2)$ | $...$ |
| $2$ | $(2,0)$ | $(2,1)$ | $(2,2)$ | $...$ |
| $...$ | $...$ | $...$ | $...$ | $...$ |

Using _diagonal sweeping_ we get,

$$
    (0,0),(0,1),(1,0),(2,0),(1,1),(0,2),...
$$

#### Fact

$\mathbb Q$ is countable. 

| $~$  | $0$ | $1$ | $-1$ | $2$ | $-2$ | $...$ |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| $1$ | $\frac{0}{1}$ | $\frac{1}{1}$ | $\frac{-1}{1}$ | $\frac{2}{1}$ | $\frac{-2}{1}$ | $...$ |
| $2$ | $\frac{0}{2}$ | $\frac{1}{2}$ | $\frac{-1}{2}$ | $\frac{2}{2}$ | $\frac{-2}{2}$ | $...$ |
| $...$ | $...$ | $...$ | $...$ | $...$ |

Using _diagonal sweeping_ we get,

$$
     \frac{0}{1}, \frac{1}{1}, \frac{0}{2}, ... 
$$

#### Fact

The union of countably infinite sets is countable, e.g.,

$$
    \mathbb Z \cup \mathbb Q, \mathbb Z \cup \mathbb N \cup \{a,b,c \}
$$

### Countability Summary

A set $A$ is countable if,

* It's finite,
* It's the union of countable sets,
* It's a subset of a countable set,
* There exists bijection $f: A \mapsto \mathbb N$,
* We can list the elements of $A$.
