# Lecture 31 - Notes  

### July 21, 2015  

# Chapter 6

## Section 6.1 -- Principal of Inclusion - Exclusion (PIE)

#### Example

Let $\mathcal U$ be the students in the first three rows. Let $C$ be the students in the first three rows who have owned a cat. Let $D$ be the students in the first three rows who have owned a dog. Let $N$ be the students in the first three rows who have owned neither a cat or a dog. So,

$$
    N = C^C \cap D^C
$$

Claim,

$$
    |\mathcal U| = |C| + |D| + |N|
$$

in general this doesn't work, since a student could own a cat and a dog.

### Theorem -- 2-PIE

For sets $A$ and $B$ of some universal set $\mathbb U$,

$$
    |A \cup B| = |A| + |B| - |A \cap B|
$$

## Example

Of $50$ feline contestants at the Ladysmith cat show, $40\%$ ($20$) are short-haired and $32$ like laser pointers.

A) Find a formula for the number roof long haired cats that don't like laser pointers.

Let,

$$\begin{aligned}
    \mathcal U &= \text{cats at the Ladysmith cat show} \newline
    S &= \text{cats with short hair at the show} \newline
    L &= \text{cats that like laser pointers at the show} \newline
\end{aligned}$$

So,

$$\begin{aligned}
    |S^C \cap L^C| &= |(S \cup L)^C| \newline
    &= |\mathcal U| - |S \cup L| \newline
    &= |\mathcal U| - |S| - |L| + |S \cap L| \newline
    &= 50 - 20 - 32 + |S \cap L| \newline
    &= |S \cap L| - 2 \newline
\end{aligned}$$

If $\left|S \cap L\right| = 2$ then $\left|S^C \cap L^C\right| = 0$ (the minimum). One the other hand if $|S \cap L| = 20$ then $\left|S^C \cap L^C\right| = 18$.

### 2-set Counting Principals

Let $A$ and $B$ be sets of the universal set $\mathcal U$.

1. $\left| A \cup B \right| = \left| A \right| + \left| B \right| - \left| A \cap B \right|$
2. $\left| A \cap B \right| \le \min(\left| A \right|,\left| B \right|)$
3. $\left| A^C \right| = \left| \mathcal U \right| - \left| A \right|$
4. $\left| A \setminus B \right| =  \left| A \right| - \left| A \cap B \right|$
5. $\left| A \oplus B \right| = \left| A \right| + \left| B \right| - 2\left| A \cap B \right|$
