# Lecture 3 - Notes  

### May 8, 2015  

## Section 0.1 Continued

#### Example

Write the following in plain english:

$$ \forall x, \exists y, x + y = 0 $$

Where the universe of $x$ and $y$ is the integers. 

##### Solution

For all integers $x$ there exists a $y$ such that the sum of $x$ and $y$ is zero.

#### Example

Write the following in plain english:

$$ \exists y, \forall x, x + y = 0 $$

Where the universe of $x$ and $y$ is the integers. 

##### Solution

This is not true because there not all $x$'s would make zero for any $y$.

### Negation of Quantifiers

$$ \neg \forall ~ x, s(x) = \exists ~ x, \neg s(x) $$
$$ \neg \exists ~ x, s(x) = \forall ~ x, \neg s(x) $$

#### Example

Prove,

$$ \neg (\forall ~ n \ge 0, n^2 - n + 41 ~\text{is prime}) $$

##### Solution

This becomes,

$$ \exists ~ n \ge 0, n^2 - n + 41 ~\text{is not prime} $$

Which we can prove by example.

### Set Notation

$$ \mathbb{Z} = \text{The set of all integers} $$

$$ \mathbb{R} = \text{The set of all real numbers} $$

$$ \mathbb{N} = \text{The set of all natural numbers} $$

$$ \mathbb{Q} = \text{The set of all rational numbers} $$

$ \in $ denotes that something belongs to a set.

#### Example

$$ x \in \mathbb{Z} = x \text{ is an integer} $$

## Section 1.1 - Truth Tables

#### Example

Construct,

$$ (\neg p \to r) \to (q ~\vee \neg r) $$

##### Solution

A giant truth table.

## Section 1.2 - The Algebra of Propositions

If a statement is always true we call it a __tautology__. For example,

$$ p ~\vee \neg p $$

If a statement is always false we call it a __contradiction__. For example,

$$ p ~\wedge \neg p $$

### Logical Equivalence

_definition_: Two statements, $s_1$ and $s_2$ are __logically equivalent__ if the biconditional, $ s_1 \leftrightarrow s_2 $, is a tautology. It is then written,

$$ s_1 \iff s_2 $$

($ s_1 \leftrightarrow s_2 $ is a statement that can be true or false, $ s_1 \iff s_2 $ is a fact that they are logically equivalent)

#### Notation


* $\mathbb{1}$ denotes a tautological statement.
* $\mathbb{0}$ denotes a contradiction statement.

### Laws of Logic

#### Idempotence

$$ p \vee p \iff p $$
$$ p \wedge p \iff p $$

#### Commutative

$$ p \vee q \iff q \vee p $$
$$ p \wedge q \iff q \wedge p $$

#### Associative

$$ (p \vee q) \vee r \iff p \vee (q \vee r) $$
$$ (p \wedge q) \wedge r \iff p \wedge (q \wedge r) $$

Note, 

$$ (p \wedge q) \vee r \nLeftrightarrow p \wedge (q \vee r) $$


#### Distributive

$$ p \wedge (q \vee r) \iff (p \wedge q) \vee (p \wedge r) $$
$$ p \vee (q \wedge r) \iff (p \vee q) \wedge (p \vee r) $$


#### DeMorgan's Laws

$$ \neg ( p \wedge q ) = (\neg p) \vee (\neg q) $$

$$ \neg ( p \vee q ) = (\neg p) \wedge (\neg q) $$



#### Identity

$$ p \wedge \mathbb{1} \iff p$$
$$ p \vee \mathbb{0} \iff p$$

#### Dominance

$$ p \wedge \mathbb{0} \iff \mathbb{0} $$
$$ p \vee \mathbb{1} \iff \mathbb{1} $$

#### Other

$$ p \to q \iff \neg p \vee q $$
$$ \neg p \to q \iff p \vee q $$
$$ p \leftrightarrow q \iff (p \to q) \wedge (q \to p) \iff (\neg p \vee q) \wedge (p  \vee \neg q ) $$


