# Lecture 2 - Notes  

### May 6, 2015  

## Section 0.1 Continued

### Implication

$$ p \rightarrow q $$

$p$ is the _hypothesis_, $q$ is the _conclusion_.

* $p$ is sufficient for $q$
* $q$ is necessary for $p$

#### Examples

(9 is odd) $\to$ (cats have fur)

This is `true`, because nine is odd.

---

(Fish live on land) $\to$ (10 is prime)

This is `false` because fish don't live on land.

### Bicondition or Double Implication

* Means $ p \to q $ and $ q \to p $
* $p$ and $q$ have the same truth value


| $p$   | $q$   | $ p \leftrightarrow q $ |
|-------|-------|----------------|
| True  | True  | True           |
| True  | False | False          |
| False | True  | False           |
| False | False | True           |

Said as "$p$ if and only if $q$" or "$p$ iff $q$"

### Negation

_definition_: The __negation__ of a statement $p$, written:

$$ \rightharpoondown p $$


| $p$   | $\rightharpoondown p $   |
|-------|-------|
| True  | False |
| False  | True |

Notation: $\rightharpoondown$ supersedes any other notation. So:

$$ \rightharpoondown p \vee q = (\rightharpoondown p) \vee q $$

#### DeMorgan's Laws

$$ \rightharpoondown ( p \wedge q ) = (\rightharpoondown p) \vee (\rightharpoondown q) $$

$$ \rightharpoondown ( p \vee q ) = (\rightharpoondown p) \wedge (\rightharpoondown q) $$


#### Example

$p =$ "John owns a cat"

$q =$ "John owns a dog"

Find:

$$ \rightharpoondown ( p \wedge q ) $$

##### Solution

We only need to break on one half to negate it. 

So $ \rightharpoondown ( p \wedge q ) =$ "John doesn't own a cat or he does not own a dog"


### Contrapositive

_definition_: The __contrapositive__ of $p \to q$ is written:

$$ \rightharpoondown q ~ \to ~ \rightharpoondown p $$

#### Example

The contrapositive of "If it rains in the morning I will bring an umbrella" is "If I did not bring an umbrella than it did not rain this morning".

### Converse

_definition_: The __converse__[^f1] of $p \to q$ is written:

$$ q \to p $$

#### Example

The converse of "If it rains in the morning I will bring an umbrella" is "If I brought an umbrella it was raining this morning"[^f2].

[^f1]: While the contrapositive is is logically equivalent to the statement the converse is not.
[^f2]: this is not logically equivalent.


| $p$   | $q$   | $ p \to q $ | $ \rightharpoondown q \to \rightharpoondown p $ | $ q \to p $ |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| True  | True  | True | True | True |
| True  | False | False | False | True |
| False | True  | True | True | False |
| False | False | True | True | True |

### Quantifiers

#### Universal Quantifier

"_For all_ integers $n$, $2n$ is even".

_For all_ is the quantifier as it quantifies the amount. In this case it is the __universal quantifier__ equivalent to:

* For all... (duh)
* For each...
* For every...
* $\forall$

#### Existential Quantifier

_definition_: The __existential quantifier__ states that this statement applies for some but not all things. It can be written:

* For some...
* There exists a...
* $\exists$

#### Example

"Some rectangles are squares" can be written "$\exists$ a rectangle $R$, such that $R$ is square"




