# Lecture 24 - Notes  

### June 30, 2015  

## Section 4.3 Continued

#### Theorem

There are infinitely many primes.

##### Proof

Suppose to the contrary that there are only a finite number of primes, call them,

$$
    p_1, p_2, ... p_n.
$$

Consider,

$$
    N = p_1p_2...p_n + 1
$$

since $N$ is larger than any $p_i$, $N$ is not prime ($N$ is composite). By the Lemma some prime divides $N$, since $p_1,p_2,...,p_n$ are all the primes,

$$
    p_i \mid N
$$

where $0 \le i \le n$. So,

$$\begin{aligned}
    N &= p_i(p_1 p_2...p_{i-1}p_{i-2}...p_n) + 1 \newline
    &= p_i m + \underbrace{1}_r \newline
\end{aligned}$$

where $m = p_1 p_2...p_{i-1}p_{i-2}...p_n$. So when we divide $N$ by $p_i$ we have a remainder of $1$. So $p_i \mid n$ which a contradiction.

$$
    \therefore \text{There are infinitely many primes.}
$$

### Paired Primes

Like,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    3&,5 \newline
    11&,13 \newline
    17&,19 \newline
\end{aligned}
$$

theres a conjecture that there are infinitely many paired primes. However it has yet to be proven.

#### Proposition (Test for Primality)

If $n > 1$ is composite,

then we know it has a prime divisor $p$ between $1 \le p \le \sqrt{n}$.

#### Example

Is $353$ prime?

##### Solution

$\sqrt{353} = 18.7$ so we need to test,

$$
    2,3,5,7,11,13,17
$$

Since none of these number divide $353$, $353$ is prime.

### Finding GCD using Prime Factorizations

If,

$$
    a = p_1^{a_1} p_2^{a_2} p_3^{a_3}... p_n^{a_n}
$$

for $a_i \ge 0$ and,

$$
    b = p_1^{b_1} p_2^{b_2} p_3^{b_3}... p_n^{b_n}
$$

for $b_i \ge 0$ then,

$$
    \gcd(a,b) = p_1^{\min(a_1,b_1)} p_2^{\min(a_2,b_2)} p_3^{\min(a_3,b_3)}... p_n^{\min(a_n,b_n)}
$$

and,

$$
    \text{lcm}(a,b) = p_1^{\max(a_1,b_1)} p_2^{\max(a_2,b_2)} p_3^{\max(a_3,b_3)}... p_n^{\max(a_n,b_n)}
$$



#### Example

Find $\gcd(270,1575)$. Using the $\mathcal{FTA}$,

$$\begin{aligned}
    270 &= 2 \cdot 3^3 \cdot 5 \newline
    1575 &= 3^2 \cdot 5^2 \cdot 7. \newline
\end{aligned}$$

So,


$$\begin{aligned}
    \gcd(270,1575) &= 3^2 \cdot 5\newline
    &= 45 \newline
\end{aligned}$$

and,


$$\begin{aligned}
    \text{lcm}(270,1575) &= 2 \cdot 3^3 \cdot 5^2 \cdot 7 \newline
    &= 9450 \newline
\end{aligned}$$

## Section 4.4 -- Congruences

_definition_: For a natural number $n \gt 1$, given integers $a$ and $b$, we says, $a$ is __congruent__ to $b$ modulo $n$,

$$
    a \equiv b \pmod n
$$

if,

$$
    n \mid (a - b)
$$

or $\frac{a}{n}$ and $\frac{b}{n}$ have the same remainder.

#### Example

Since,

$$\begin{aligned}
    9 &\equiv 2 \pmod 7 \newline
    16 &\equiv 9 \pmod 7 \newline
\end{aligned}$$
 
 we can say,
 
 $$
    2 \equiv 16 \equiv 9 \pmod 7
 $$

#### Example

It's 11 AM. What time will it be in 22 hours?

##### Solution

It will be 9 AM (not 33 AM).

Why? Times rollover after 24 hours.

#### Example

Draw a $405^\circ$ ray.

#### Solution

Since angles rollover after $360^\circ$, we can draw $45^\circ$.

### Least Residue mod $n$

_definition_:For integers $a$ and $b$ where $a \equiv b \pmod n$, we say $b$ is the __least residue mod $n$__ if $0 \le b \le n$.
