# Lecture 7 - Notes  

### May 19, 2015  

# Chapter 2 - Sets and Relations

## Section 2.1 - Sets

_definition_: A __set__ is a collection of objects. The objects are called __elements__ or __members__.

* If $x$ is and element of set $S$ then we write $x \in S$.

### Explicit Listing Notation

Listing all the elements in a set.

#### Examples

$$
    A = \{ 1,2 \}
$$
$$
    B = \{ a,b,c \}
$$
$$
    C = \{ -1, \pi, \text{cat} \}
$$
$$
    D = \{ \{\underset{\text{set}}a\},\underset{\text{set}}B, \underset{\text{#}}5 \}
$$

### Implicit Listing Notation

List enough elements to make the pattern obvious.

#### Examples

$$
    \{ 2,4,6,8,... \}
$$
$$
    \mathbb{Z} = \{ ..., -3,-2,-1,0,1,2,3,... \}
$$
$$
    \mathbb{Z}+ = \{ 1,2,3,... \}
$$
It's debated whether or not the natural numbers contain $0$.
$$
    \mathbb{N} = \{ 1,2,3,... \}
$$
$$
    \mathbb{N}_0 = \{ 0,1,2,3,... \}
$$

### Set Builder Notation

Describe the elements by providing some characteristic of them.

#### Example

Suppose we want the prime numbers,

$$
    \{ x : x \text{ is prime} \}
$$

Translates to "All values of $x$ such that $x$ is prime".

#### Examples

$$
    \{ n \in \mathbb{Z} : n < 20, n \text{ is even}, n > 0 \} = \{ 2,4,6, ... , 18 \}
$$
$$
    \mathbb{Q} = \{ \frac{a}{b} : a,b \in \mathbb{Z}, b \neq 0 \}
$$
$$
    \mathbb{C} = \{ a + bi : a, b \in \mathbb{R} \}
$$ 

### Set Properties

_definition_: Sets $A$ and $B$ are equal ($A = B$) if they have the same elements. That is,

$$
    x \in A \iff x \in B
$$

##### Note:

* Sets are unordered,

$$
    \{ 1,2,3 \} = \{ 3,1,2 \}
$$

* Unless specified repeated elements are ignored,

$$
    \{ 1,2,2,3,3,3 \} = \{ 1,2,3 \}
$$

### Empty Set

_definition_: The __empty set__ is the set with no elements written, $\emptyset$ or $\{\}$.

#### Example

The years that Vancouver has won the Stanley Cup $= \emptyset$.

#### Example

$$
    \{ \frac{a}{b} \in \mathbb{Q} : \frac{a}{b} = \sqrt{2} \} = \emptyset
$$

#### Example

Does $\emptyset = \{ \emptyset \}$?

##### Solution

No. The second set has one element, the first set has no elements.

#### Example

How many elements does,

$$
    \{ \emptyset, \{ \emptyset, \{ \{ \emptyset \} \} \}, \{ \emptyset \} \}
$$

have?

##### Solution

Three,

* $\emptyset$
* $\{ \emptyset, \{ \{ \emptyset \} \} \}$
* $\{ \emptyset \}$

### Subsets

_definition_: Let $A$ and $B$ be sets. $A$ is a __subset__ of $B$ ($A \subseteq B$) if every element in $A$ is also in $B$ (but not necessarily the reverse). That is $x \in A \Rightarrow x \in B$.

*  If $A$ is not a subset of $B$ we write $A \not\subseteq B$
